The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tres utile et compendieulx Traicte de l'art
et science d'orthographie gallicane dedans lequel sont comprinses plusieurs
choses necessaires, curieuses, nouvelles et dignes de scavoir non veues
auparavant. Avec une petite introduction pour congnoistre a lire le
chiffre, by anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Tres utile et compendieulx Traicte de l'art et science
       d'orthographie gallicane dedans lequel sont comprinses plusieurs
       choses necessaires, curieuses, nouvelles et dignes de scavoir non
       veues auparavant. Avec une petite introduction pour congnoistre a
       lire le chiffre

Author: anonymous

Release Date: December 23, 2020 [eBook #64113]

Language: French

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Laurent Vogel and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale de
             France (BnF/Gallica)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRES UTILE ET COMPENDIEULX TRAICTE
DE L'ART ET SCIENCE D'ORTHOGRAPHIE GALLICANE DEDANS LEQUEL SONT COMPRINSES
PLUSIEURS CHOSES NECESSAIRES, CURIEUSES, NOUVELLES ET DIGNES DE SCAVOIR NON
VEUES AUPARAVANT. AVEC UNE PETITE INTRODUCTION POUR CONGNOISTRE A LIRE LE
CHIFFRE ***





¶ Tresutile Et compendieulx Traicté de l'art et science d'orthographie
Gallicane/ dedans lequel sont comprinses plusieurs choses necessaires/
curieuses nouvelles/ et dignes de sçavoir/ non veues auparavant. Avec
une petite introduction pour congnoistre a lire le chiffre.

[Illustration]




¶ A treshonnorable et excellent juge Jacques d'aoust bailly D'abbeville
Salut et prosperité.


Combien que plusieurs poetes et orateurs françoys eussent jadis par leur
melliflue eloquence et abundante facunde/ tellement enrichy la doulce
langue gallicane: que sus toute aultre vernacule est aujourd'huy la plus
propice & copieuse pour bien deduire toute chose de quelque importance
qu'elle soit si esse qu'ilz ont sus leurs escriptures: tant solutes que
liees selon mesure armonieuse/ ou delaissé/ ou changé/ ou entremeslé
aulcuns traictz lesquelz ont beaucoup corrumpu l'orthographie & adommagé
ses bonnes painctures & estoffes naturelles. Et ce ne nous doibt point
seulement desplaire ains esmouvoir & semondre pour luy faire recouvrer
ses premieres & vives couleurs reputez d'estime frivole par le succroysi
de l'adulterine paincture. Car s'il est ainsi que ayons veu en ce temps
heureux toutes sciences plus esclarcir que jamais/ tout art florir &
venir a perfection/ chascun prendre plaisir a ressouldre & augmenter son
industrie sans espargner peine ne labeur. Cela doibt estre occasion
suffisante de stimuler aygrir/ et ouvrir les entendemens des zelateurs
de ladicte langue pour entreprendre & visiter les escriptures perverties
& depravees en extirpant toutes faultes & erreurs affin de les revoquer
a leur premiere et antinque integrité. Neantmoins on a jusques icy fait
de ce nulle ou petite reputation: dont telles difficultez & obscurtez
ont pullulé/ pour le present il n'est pas legier ne aysé de les cercler
et purement nettoyer. Or entendu que les ancestres se sont deportez de
entamer ceste matiere il sembleroit oultrecuder & temerité de vouloir
investiguer plus avant. Mais l'utilité qui en peult suivir doibt vaincre
et donner hardiesse de mettre la main a ce labeur. Au regard dequoy &
aussi par les improbes exhortations d'aulcuns avec lesquelz j'ay non
vulgaire familiarité suis contraint d'exposer ce petit traicté: non
point que je pense qu'il soit souffisant de restaurer l'orthographie en
sa dignité pristine: Mais affin que les amateurs de ladicte langue
françoyse prennent cueur chascun en son endroit: & s'efforcent de la
redresser & restablir en son entiere et absolute perfection. pourtant
treshonnoré seigneur comme je fusse persuadé par iceulx mes amys que
ceste lecture donneroit passetemps: & trouveroit lieu entre gentz de
doctrine non proletaire entre lesquelz vous teniez le front devant.
Ainsi soubz l'ombre de vostre protection m'a semblé chose convenable et
decente & ay esté contrainct de laxer & communiquer les premices de
nostre petite tenuité esperant que au moyen de vous pourront impetrer
faveur et recueil devant les yeulx des benivoles lecteurs.

¶ Donné d'abbeville le .xxii. de septembre. Mil cinq centz vingt neuf.


Orthographie est ung terme grec fait par longue espace de temps commun &
comme propre a nostre langue dont pour le present il nous suffira de la
diffinition Orthographie doncques est une science & industrie de sçavoir
bien escripre. Non point que ce soit de bien farder ou paindre sa lettre
mais de non changer/ adjouter ou diminuer une lettre pour l'autre en son
escripture. On congnoit suffisamment les lectres requises a bien
escripre par l'a bé cé lesquelles sont devisez en voielles a/ e/ i/ o/
u/ avec y grec: les autres sont dictes consonantes Nous appellons une
lectre voielle quand de soymesme elle fournit pleine voix Consonante
quand de soymesme n'a point sa voix mais la mendie de la voielle comme
b/ de/ e/ car il est impossible de pronuncer b sans e/ et ainsi des
aultres. Toutes lettres au franchois sont de une seulle syllabe laquelle
chose est manifeste en la prolation des voielles et qu'il soit ainsy des
aultres nous le comprehendrons facillement. Car la lettre est dicte
consonante puis qu'elle sonne avec la voielle comme d/ avec e et non
point avec deux ou plusieurs. Je dis ce affin de abolir la folle usance
ou plus tost l'abuz de nostre picardie en laquelle nous proferons effe
l'ache/ emme/ enne/ erre esse/ iux/ zetdre/ pour ef ha em en et ex. Et
me tairay des parisiens qui dient boy/ choy/ doy & ce. En passant les
aultres subdivisions lesquelles ne servent rien a nostre propos car
ceste seule suffit a bien furnir & discerner de l'escripture gallicane.

¶ De ces lettres figurees ou elementaires c'est a dire escriptes ou
proferees depend & efflue nostre langue franchoise car des lettres/ la
sillabe: & des sillabes est la vocale composé.

¶ Il est requis a la sillabe une ou plusieurs consonantes avec une seule
voielle combien que la voielle (a raison de sa pleine sonorité) fait
souvent de soymesme une sillabe.

¶ Or s'il advient que en une sillabe deux voielles avec leur vertu &
leur force vocale lesdites deux voielles ainsy cousues & liees sont
appellees diphthongue. et sont seullement quatre au latin ae/ oe/ au/ eu
avec ei grec mais on n'a point encoire arresté en nostre langue le
nombre neantmoins s'ensuyt celles que avons amoncellé premierement.

  aa          Comme aage dissyllabe escript coustumierement par double
              aa en sa premiere nomnobstant je escriproye eage.

  Ae          Du latin comme praeferer. &c.

  Ai vel ay   Plait/ hait/ mais/ feray

  Ao          Aorner

  Au          Au chault hault

  Ea          Eage aneanter/ changea. &c.

              On a jusques icy escript barbarement jehan/ lequel en sa
              prolation & mesmement en mesure rithmique est monosyllabe
              comme si eha fut dipthongue: combien qu'il soit requis de
              riens interposer entre deux voielles apprengnent doncques
              les jennins a escripre leurs noms.

  Ee          Orneement de ornate.

              On escripra double ee devant ment quand on le proferera en
              pleine sonorité masculine il est masculin par tout ou il
              resone comme en trinité facilité/ faculté. Il est feminin
              quand il a le son remis et doulx comme france/ doctrine/
              divine. Sy e doncques devant (ment) est feminin il est
              simple/ comme fermement/ ornement de ornatus. S'il est
              masculin il est double comme affermeement orneement (de
              ornate) si vous n'aymez mieulx escripre ornement par ae et
              ainsi des aultres.

  Ei          Feit/ pareil conseil

  Eo          George jugeons

  Eu          Cheut deux courageulx

  Ia          Diable

  Ie          liege siege pierre douziesme

  Io          Consternions estions

¶ Notez que la coustume des gros picardz proferent souvent io ou il
affiert seullement o comme (niom) monosyllabe pour nom/ pourquoy si nous
voulions escripre selon leur prolation/ nous aurions (comme les flamens)
double ii dipthongue.

  Oa          Comme coac mais ce est rare

  Oe          Du latin

  Oi vel oy   Bois besoing roy

  Ou          Bourg court tours

  Vi vel uy   Huile huy

Despautere dit huy interjection estre monosyllabe & baille pour tesmoing
feretus en quoy luy et son tesmoing c'est abusé: car on ne treuve point
au latin uy dipthongue: pareillement u aprés h ne perd point vertu de
consonante parquoy il est necessairement dyssillabe.


¶ Comment v/ perd aulcuneffoys vertu de voielle & consonante.

¶ Or affin que ne jugeons mal dipthongue pour non dipthongue nous
noterons icy que u aprés g/ q/ &/ s/ suyvant quelque voielle en la mesme
syllabe perd nom de voielle & de consonante & despautere l'appelle lors
liquide. Car il ne se profere point (dit il) comme voielle & n'est point
totalement supprimé ains est pronuncé comme en son languissant laquelle
chose nous cognoissons signamment aprés g suyvante/ & i/ comme en
distinguer languir car si u. estoit du tout supprimé on profereroit
distinger/ langir. Et ainsi perdre vertu de consonante est une lettre ne
pouoir avoir sonorité ou pleine resonance avec la voielle de elle mesme
si devant ladicte lettre ne procede quelque aultre consone qui soit en
la mesme syllabe/ car sy nous rejectons g/ de distinguer ou languir. il
sera impossible de proferer leurs dernieres sillabes.

¶ Et si v. estoit consonante on profereroit lang vir disting ver ou g.
ne tiendroit point de la derniere sillabe v. donques n'est poin en ce
consonante attendu qu'il ne consone point & qu'il n'a point plein son
avec la voielle neantmoins ne perd point non de lettre comme nous
monstrerons cy aprés.

¶ Selon la prolation observee des Franchois u. aprés lesdictes
consonantes/ suyvant a/ &/ o/ voielles en la mesme sillabe a le son mort
car nous proferons aqua distinguo comme sy on escripvoit aqa distingo
sans u: neantmoins selon la prolation italienne ou germanicque on oit u.
avoir son de voielle et semblablement suyvant e/ & i/ v/ perd telle
force au latin aprés g/ q/ et s/ seullement: mais en nostre langue aprés
toutes consonantes moyennant que en la mesme syllabe suyve quelque
voielle comme buire/ cuire/ conduit/ fuir/ distinguer/ juillet luire/
nuison/ nuisant/ puis/ quelle/ bruit/ poursuit/ truaulx vualon auquel v:
premier est consonante comme i/ en juillet. Aprés x/ et z/ vous le
trouverez en aulcuns noms de regions et termes forains.

¶ Et combien que u en ce semble avoir comme sonorité de voielle sy esse
qu'il ne resone non plus aprés lesdictes consonantes que aprés s.

¶ Or puis qu'il est ainsi que aprés perd vertu vocale & de consone: il
s'ensuyt necessairement (attendu qu'il ne change point de sonorité ains
retient pareille resonance comme fuir suir & ainsy des aultres) que la
debvons juger perdre telle vertu dessoubz les lettres predictes: mais je
suys icy plus long qu'il ne appartient a matiere isagogique.

¶ Oultreplus v perd aulcuneffoys telle vertu aprés h: comme en huytiesme
aulcuneffoys que non comme en huile laquelle est impossible de discerner
a la prolation: veu que la sonorité n'en change point: mais de ce
parlerons cy aprés.


¶ De i: et u. consonante.

¶ Il ne seroit point besoing descripre ce que les enfans ne ignorent
c'est que i: et: u. sus toutes voielles faisans les premieres lettres de
la syllabe sont consonantes comme juste adjuteur vertu/ converser: Mais
maistre pierre Fabry treuve sus v en (vulgaire) dipthongue en quoy il
n'est pas digne d'estre reprins.


¶ De sinaerese.

¶ Nous noterons icy affin de discerner la dipthongue de non dipthongue
que deux voielles naturellement separees s'estraindent et joingnent en
une syllabe par sinaerese Jean le maire en l'epytaphe de bissipat.

    Veez cy le corps de l'ung de plus gentilz.

¶ Item

    le bien naissant de subtile poesie.

¶ Item.

    Voulzit bransler par art de geometrie/

ee/ en veez oe en poesie & geometrie ne sont point dipthongues ains sont
naturellement dyssillabes & sont ainsi noees en une par ladicte figure
inventee seullement pour mettre: sinaerese doncques aultrement appellee
Episgualophe est quand deux voielles naturellement separees se serrent
en une syllabe.


¶ De diaerese.

¶ Nous avons une aultre figure opposite par laquelle la dipthongue est
desnoee & partie en deux syllabes George chastellain aux epytaphes
D'hector

    Las est cheute en terre & pourriture.

¶ Item le maire en ung traicté de cupido et atropos.

    Print sa niepce en ses bras desja froide

& en plusieurs aultres lieux: Car cheute sont en ce trisyllabe
aultrement la mesure ne seroit point observee. Diaerese est division
d'une syllabe en deux assez usitee tant au françoys que au latin Ovyde.

    Nunc quoque te salvo persoluenda michi.

¶ Item

    debuerant fusos evoluisse dies.

¶ Item en l'hystoire de sainct vulfran.

    Prudenter moderans fortis iustus erat.

En quoy iustus est trisyllabe comme persoluenda & evoluisse de cinq.
J'ay icy parlé desdictes figures affin que les ignorans se doybvent
garder de condempner ce qu'il n'entendent pas & d'icelles on doibt user
sobrement: car elles furent pour necessité de mesure inventees. Pour
consuyvir nostre propos encommencé en nostre langue vulgaire les
voielles s'entreayment tellement que trois nerfvees naturellement
ensemble font seullement une syllabe laquelle chose ne se faict point au
latin comme.

  Aou           Aoust saouller
  Eay vel eai   Changeay jugeai
  Eau           Beau nouveau
  Eoi           Bourgeois liegeois
  Iei           Vieillard
  Ieu vel yeu   Dieu lieu lieu
  Oei           Voeil oeil
  Oeu           Coeur soeur oeuvre
  Oue           Coueffe/ mirouers comme escripvent aulcuns.
  ouy vel oui   Ouy de ita/ souillon Brouillon.

¶ Je dis devant naturellement nerfvees a cause que par sinaerese trois
voielles se serrent en une syllabe qui de leur nature font deux syllabes
Jean le maire.

    Elle va veoir la noble germanie.

¶ Item en l'epitaphe de bissipat.

    Par foys sus luy puis l'eslevoient aux cieulx

    soient preservez ja pieça ne leut on.

Et m'est advis selon que estoient descriptz en quoy trois voielles font
(non point naturellement) mais par figure troys syllabes. On use
semblablement icy de diaerese en decoppant lesdictes trois voielles en
deux si esse qu'il en fault user sobrement.


¶ Des lettres en particulier et premierement de c/ k/ &/ qu.

¶ Pour descendre aux lettres particulierement nous debvons entendre que
les grecz ont une lettre dicte cappa pour laquelle nous avons c/ k/ &/
qu/ lesquelles trois devant a/ o/ et u/ tant au latin comme en nostre
vernacule ont semblable sonorité car catherine/ comment/ curieux/ se
proferent et resonnent comme sy on escripvoit katharine/ komment/
kurieux/ ou quatharine/ quomment quurieux neantmoins il se fault donner
de garde/ d'escripre une lettre pour l'autre k et qu. sus e/ et y ont
semblable prolation et resonance car question resonne comme sy on
escripvoit kestion kyrie comme sy on escrivoit quyrié. Mais c devant
lesdictes deux voielles change de sonorité aultrement vous ne trouveriez
point de discorde entre citer. & quiter. entre querimonie et cerimonie.
k/ ne se ose trouver aux françoys sinon en noms forains et barbares.


¶ Des vocables terminez en ique.

¶ Nous noterons icy que qu/ du latin se convertit aulcuneffoys en c/
comme de quinque cinq/ aulcuneffoys que c/ en qu/ comment de convocare
convoquer. dont nous subsinuerons que les noms latins en icus transmuez
au françoys en ique (comme de angelicus angelique) se doybvent escripre
sans interposer .c. entre .i. et .q. car attendu que c est mué en qu.

¶ Il s'ensuyt que c devant qu est superflu pourquoy on escript mal
magnifique mistique. &c. per c.


¶ De ence/ ense/ tion/ sion/ ction. xion et semblables.

¶ Oultre plus puys c a quelque intelligence avec t et s il est necessité
pour bonne orthographie de retourner au latin touchant les dictions
terminees en ence ou ense car pour bien escripre prudence clemence &
semblables nous retournons a prudentia clementia ou t se mue en c Item
nous congnoissons qu'il fault escripre offense immense. &c. par s a
cause qu'ilz descendent de offensa mensus semblablement response a cause
de responsum: a l'opposite annunce/ denunce/ renunce a raison de
annuncio. &c. Nous congnoissons aussy que debvons escripre par double ss
passion profession possession par passio professio. &c. au contraire
perdition/ inhibition/ invention par t. Extraction dilection par ct.
Influxion annexion par x. Et generallement pour observer bonne
escripture il convient recourir au latin si les dictions descendent
directement dudict latin


De d et t.

¶ Attendu aussy si d et t en la fin du vocable ont quelque prochaine
resonnance nous regarderons pour bien discerner de l'escripture s'il
descend dudit vocable quelque denominatif lequel brisera tout le
different comme il fault escripre concord normand/ picard/ verd &
semblables par d ainsy que les denominatifz concorde normandie/
picardie/ verdure enseignent au contraire fort couvert. &c. par t a
raison de ouverture/ fortitude couverture. Si le vocable est verbe nous
passerons au preterit comme mordoye pendoye descendoient & semblables
demonstrent qu'il fault escripre mord pend descend. &c. par d. S'il est
nom ou participe ou feminin comme sourd sourde truand truande/
superabundant superabundante.


De f et g

¶ Comme les aultres consones retient sa peculiere sonorité signamment
dessus a o et u: car sus e & i resone comme i consonante. Si doncques
nous interposons e entre lesdictes trois voielles change et mue sa
sonorité comme george resone aultrement que gorge a raison de e
interposé. Ainsi plusieurs non congnoissantz ceste immitation delaissent
e ou il affiert en escripvant changay/ bourgeoys jugeant et cetera.

¶ Oultre ce g devant n consonante en une mesme syllabe fait beguer &
ploier la langue comme borgne besongne/ espargne et semblables moyennant
qu'ilz ne descendent pas du latin ayant gn lequel on profere communement
sans ploier la langue comme magnifique regnant digne. &c.


¶ De f.

¶ Les vocables terminez en ive descendantz du latin combien qu'ilz ayent
le masculin au franchoys en if: sy esse qu'il rejectent f au feminin
comme apellatif applative: mais quant il ne profluent point du latin il
reservent f au feminin comme hatif hatifve & semblables.


¶ De h.

H tant au latin que au françoys aspire toutes voielles & une seulle
consonante qui est c: car les vocables retenantz ph/ rh/ et ih/ ne sont
point purs latins. ne françoys mais descendent du grec. Entre lesquelles
h ne aspire point seullement p: mais ainsi luy faict changer amolir/ &
muer sa propre resonance aultrement il n'y auroit point de difference
entre la prolation de pharisien et parisien. D'avantaige en nostre
langue domesticque h retient ceste mesme vertu sur c et fait amolir &
adoulcer la raisonance laquelle chose il ne fait point au latin comme
demonstre charitas et charité: car comme nous avons dit dessus: c devant
a/ o/ et u s'y profere comme si on escripvoit qu au lieu de c mais sy
nous aspirons c devant lesdictes trois voielles/ l'aspiration change et
molifie la prolation comme coler est plus dur que choler. Et ainsi nous
congnoissons a la prolation quand on doibt aspirer c ou non comme a
proferer catherine/ captivité/ compaignon flacon gascon curieux et
semblables. on congnoit que c ne se aspire point a l'opposite il est
aspiré en chanoyne charton chose charbonnier et semblables pourquoy il
est evident que on escriproit mal sans h franchois/ fachon/ lechon/ et
semblables car sans h on profereroit franquois. &c. Vous excepterez les
vocables descendans du grec comme chaldee/ chananee cholere &c. Avec
sçavoir & ses dependans sy on veult escripre & suyvir. La coustume
tresusitee neantmoins j'estime qu'il est besoing selon vraye
orthographie de interposer e. car nous escripvons au present tu scez: il
scet lequel e debvons garder par tout en escripvant nous sceavons vous
sceavez il sceavent par lequelles picardz escripvent il scevent.

On addoulte donques c devant lesdictes trois voielles a o u en
interposant e comme cea pour lequel on escript mal ca/ excerceant
excerceoit. Plusieurs s'enforcent prouver h avoir au latin vertu de
consonante mais toute leur digladiation est soustenue et brisee par le
bouclier de cesure.

Il est donques saulves toutes leurs bonnes raisons au latin seulement
aspiration neantmoins il a au franchoys vertu de consonante/ et est pure
consonnante Car e feminin devant h pure aspiration est tousjours
synaloephe absumé & anglouty et ce est moult commun: mere sotte en ses
fantasies.

    Prennent plaisir de quelque homme jouir

    devant ses yeulx le sage homme fault mettre

et aultres infinies exemples Mais quant h resone comme en hardy: hay
hobin & semblables n'endure jamais que e feminin soit absumé Jehan le
maire en l'epistre de l'amant verd

    dont le hault cueur de vray amour pur ivre.

    Que haÿ soye & que frustré me voye

    son maistre hault prince de portugal

    Et ce hobin malheureux & mauldit

Item mere sotte en ses fantasies

    Le cris d'aultruy faisant mainte harengue.

    En demonstrant bras droit face hardie

en quoy h a pleine resonance et sonne avec la voielle ayant force et
vertu de consone et est vraye consonante mais aux aultres est seulement
aspiration car homme horrible helas ne resonent non plus que sy h estoit
delaissé


De i devant l.

I devant l final remploie aulcunement la prolation moiennant que ledit i
soit accouplé par diptongue avec quelque aultre voielle ou deux comme
metail conseil/ ceil laquelle chose il ne faict point seul et sans
aultre voielle comme fertil/ util/ viril subtil. &c. Mais .i. devant
double ll soit seul ou joinct par diphthongue faict (au proferer) ploier
et becquer la langue come traveille/ bataille/ grille/ estrille
moiennant que la diction ne descende point du latin ayant double ll: car
lors la prolation est droicte comme en distille ville et semblables.
Nous escripvons doncques fille par double ll a cause que sa prolation
fait becquer la langue combien qu'il descende de filia lequel a simple
l.


Des vocables terminez en elle & el.

Tous vocables descendantz des noms terminez en elus ou elis et des
verbes en elo ont simple l comme fidele/ zele/ revele Tous aultres ont
double ll comme surpernelle sempiternelle/ naturelle combien qu'il
descende de naturalis.


Des terminez en ales et allis.

Tous vocables profluantz directement du latin aiant a sus l/ ont simple
l comme scandale regale: imperiale: brutale tous les aultres ont double
ll.


De io.

Jamais on ne doibt escripre p entre m & n pourquoy on escript mal dampne
car il fault escripre damne condemne par e non par a sans p.


De r

R simple soit au commencement au mylieu ou en la fin a tousjours forte
resonance sy elle n'est point enclose entre deux voielles entre
lesquelles a son foible et petit comme difference dirime.


De s.

¶ S simple entre deux voielles a la sonorité de z Pourtant il se fault
donner garde d'escripre simple s pour double ss et au contraire: comme
poisson pour poison coussin pour cousin en retournant pour observer
bonne orthographie a la prolation par laquelle nous congnoissons la
difference comme bourgeoise s'escript par simple s angoisse par double
et ainsy des aultres Jasoyt doncques sont deux dictions: voire quand il
ne derive point de Jasez ou Jazer terme nouveau.

¶ Item s s'escript en la premiere & secunde personne du preterit
parfaict de l'indicatif comme aimasmes aymastes feismes feistes et ainsy
des aultres verbes. Semblablement aux dictions de nombre comme
deuxziesme troiziesme. &c.

¶ Il seroit aussi bon de l'escripre en la tierce persone singuliere
dudict preterit pour mettre difference a la tierce personne du present
comme dist de dixit list de legit & semblables.


De t.

¶ Ti devant une voielle resone ci comme perdition declaration. si s/ ou
x n'est sus t comme question commixtion ou selon aulcun commistion: ou
si la diction ne proflue du grec mathias mathieu car lors t a sa propre
resonance


De st.

¶ Communement les vocables derivantz directement du latin ayant st: au
franchois s retient son sibil comme coeleste/ triste terrestre manifeste
et ceter. excepté tempeste destruire monstrer avec peu d'aultre que je
passe.

¶ Notez directement car s'ilz descendent indirectement s n'est point
ouye comme en maistre cloistre apostre beste car on diroit directement
maistre/ claustre/ apostole/ beste On pourroit icy dire que aimastes et
semblables viennent directement du latin de amastis Je dis que non car
nous disons regulierement amavistis et par figure amastis.

Toutes aultres dictions escriptes par st et s devant e a le son mort &
sans sibil comme teste/ admoneste enqueste hastif/ baston paistre/
naistre. &c. Excepté poste bastillon et teston selon la coustume du
Jourd'huy avec peu d'aultres.


De v.

¶ Combien que Quintilian die o & u estre l'ung pour l'aultre immué sy
esse que je n'ay jusques icy trouvé grammerien discernant la prolation
des vocables latins ayantz u: ausquelz en la mesme sillabe m ou n
suyvent continuellement En quoy nous oyons (selon la commune prolation)
u avoir la sonorité de o comme mundus/ seculorum/ legunt/ ungo/ et tous
aultres sy non cunctus/ punctus defunctus Neantmoins les dictions pures
gallicanes aiantz u devant n ou m reservent et proferent u non point o
comme brun verdun aulcun. &c. Jasoit donques que en furibunde facunde/
secunde/ munde/ quelcunque profunde & en semblables derivantz u ait
sonorité de o sy fault il escripre pour observer bonne orthographie u
nonobstant quelconque coustume. Nous avons monstré devant que v est
maintenant voielle/ maintenant consonante et que aulcuneffois perd nom
de voielle & de consonante a quoy chascun se consent/ mais aulcuns dyent
que lors perd nom de lettre Or pour bien entendre et juger de cest
affaire nous prenderons ceste mettre gallicane.

    Longe selon son ordre le huitiesme.

En laquelle si u n'estoit point lettre e necessairement le absumeroit en
tant que h en huitiesme est pure aspiration comme aspiration ne empesche
point la synalephe par plus forte raison si i n'est point lettre ne
l'empeschera point. Oultre s'il estoit voielle e semblablement se
absumeroit. et s'il estoit consonante on profereroit huitiesme comme si
on escrivoit vitiesme il ne perd point donques nom de lettre: et est
(comme il est dit dessus) liquide. Si nous desirons congnoistre quant u
aprés h perd nom de consonante et de voielle/ ou quand elle est voielle
nous nous retirerons a la rithme en laquelle si e feminin s'absume il
est voyelle. Si non il n'est voielle ne consonante mais le pourrons
nommer liquide.


¶ De .x.

Nous escrivons la fin de dictions en eux/ eulx oux/ oulx/ aux et aulx/
par x non point par .z.


¶ De y grec.

¶ Nous escrivons coustumierement y grec en la fin de la diction comme
roy esmoy/ feray/ amy/ icy. &c. Et aussi en la diction descendant du
grec ayant y grec comme hypocrite en la premiere syllabe/ abysme/
babylonne/ tyrant de tyrannus et semblables.


¶ De .s. et .z.

¶ Vocables ayans b/ c/ d/ f/ l/ & t. au singulier ont/ z/ aprez
lesdictes consonantes au plurier. Les terminez en/ g/ m/ n/ p/ r/ ont au
plurier s. On escript par coustume les participes et noms terminez en
ant ou ent/ au plurier par s: muant t en s comme negligent/ negligens.
J'aymeroye mieulx adjouter s aprés t: & escripre negligentz vaillantz &
ainsy des aultres. Oultre ce tout vocable terminé en e feminin ayant
sibil retient s finale comme divines/ vaillables/ bourgeoises/ discordes
promesses/ bonnes/ dures et semblables/ au contraire le masculin a z/
comme deitez/ irritez/ precepitez. &c. Nous avons declairé dessus quand
ung terme est masculin ou feminin. Je porroye icy assembler plusieurs
dictions a l'escripture desquelles on voit leur difference comme dix de
decem/ dis de dico/ dictz de dicta/ Lesquelles je laisse aux diligentz
lecteurs.

¶ Et pour la fin nous debvons songneusement retourner au latin et
regarder parfaictement l'orthographie latine pour nous reigler en nostre
escripture franchoise nous sommes souvent abusez par faulte de ce comme
par faulte de tirer au latin nous escrivons/ escripre/ escripvoit. &c.
par p combien que latin scribere scribebat n'a point de p. ainsi on est
deceupt/ pour cause que escript lequel vient de scriptus s'escrit par p:
et ainsi des aultres lesquelz je passe pour briefveté.


¶ Aux lecteurs.

¶ Nous avons beningz lecteurs entamé ceste matiere non point que pensons
avoir satisfait ou pour satisfaire mais nostre intention est
principallement de animer et aygrir les engins des gentilz facteurs &
vrays zelateurs de nostre langue franchoise pour rencontrer l'ung
l'autre au passetemps de doulce et amiable concertation et que par telle
collision ilz viennent esclarcir et nettoyer la rouillure/ les faultes/
et obscurtez grandement noircies/ corrompues/ et perverties par les
faulses escriptures/ et aussi pour la restituer en son honneur a la
gloire et exaltation de tous franchois.


¶ Finis


¶ Imprimé a paris pour Jehan saint denis libraire demourant a paris en
la rue neufve nostre dame a l'enseigne sainct Nicolas.




Note du transcripteur

On a conservé l'orthographe (y compris ses variantes, par exemple
«diphthongue, diphtongue, diptongue»), la ponctuation et l'usage des
majuscules de l'original. Pour faciliter la lecture, on a toutefois
résolu les abréviations par signes conventionnels (par exemple «cõe,
cõme» sont transcrits «comme»), introduit apostrophes, cédilles et
accents, et distingué u/v et i/j à l'intérieur des mots (on a laissé les
formes u, v, i identiques à l'original lorsqu'il s'agit de lettres
isolées).

On a matérialisé plus distinctement le découpage en titres et alinéas,
parfois peu apparent dans l'original, et isolé les citations en vers
(qui figurent sans séparation dans le corps du texte dans l'original).

On a effectué les corrections suivantes:

    germaine > germanie (Elle va veoir la noble germanie)
    verd > verbe (Si le vocable est verbe)
    Premierement > Prennent (Prennent plaisir de quelque homme jouir)

et rectifié quelques erreurs manifestement imputables au typographe (par
exemple: antre > autre, voille > voielle, etc.) non signalées dans le
détail.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRES UTILE ET COMPENDIEULX TRAICTE
DE L'ART ET SCIENCE D'ORTHOGRAPHIE GALLICANE DEDANS LEQUEL SONT COMPRINSES
PLUSIEURS CHOSES NECESSAIRES, CURIEUSES, NOUVELLES ET DIGNES DE SCAVOIR NON
VEUES AUPARAVANT. AVEC UNE PETITE INTRODUCTION POUR CONGNOISTRE A LIRE LE
CHIFFRE ***

***** This file should be named 64113-0.txt or 64113-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/6/4/1/1/64113/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
